 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              1 
Reduction of muscle activation in the right leg during gait using a passive 
exoskeleton  
Jaime A. Loaiza, Adriana R. Laurent 
Abstract – Simulations permit adding external elements, 
such as assistive devices, and observing their behavior. 
OpenSim is a platform that can model and simulate 
musculoskeletal systems.  In this project, we will explore 
how parameters of an assistive device based on an elastic 
element may influence muscle activation during walking; 
similar to the presence of Collins et al. (2015) and Sawicki 
et al. (2016) research. We performed all the analysis using 
experimental data form a RRA optimized model in 
OpenSim to determine optimal stiffness and optimal resting 
length as well as to perform a geometrical analysis of the 
proposed assistive device. We explored the effect of the 
assistive device and its parameters on four different muscle 
groups (plantar flexors, dorsiflexors, knee flexors and knee 
extensors) and found optimal stiffness and rest length for 
the proposed device’s elastic band. 
Keywords - Ankle, exoskeleton, stiffness, resting length, 
geometry. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
During human evolution, the musculoskeletal system has 
always sought to be efficient during walking, in other words, 
the musculoskeletal system uses the least amount of metabolic 
energy to carry out movements, however, any change generates 
gait cycle pathologies. Currently, passive exoskeletons seek to 
solve the pathologies of the gait cycle [1,2]. 
In this project, we will study a similar device as present by 
Collins[1] and Sawicki [2] made from an extension spring 
placed around the ankle joint. While different models have been 
proposed throughout the field, we seek to present our own take 
on an elastic band exoskeleton for the ankle joint. 
II. 
METHODS 
We performed all analysis on the right leg of an OpenSim model 
to which RRA had already been applied. Through the use of 
static optimization, we investigated how an ideal passive 
exoskeleton affected the muscle distribution problem. Like this, 
we started by analyzing how the stiffness and resting length of 
the extension spring affected the activation of muscle groups 
responsible for the movement of the ankle joint during gait. It 
is important to mention that the initial geometric model of the 
exoskeleton is an ideal representation, meaning that it follows 
the same geometric path as the right soleus. For this reason, a 
second geometric study was performed in which a more realistic 
exoskeletal model was developed (Figure 1). Through the 
modification of the elastic band’s (extension spring) geometry 
path, we were able to represent a realistic external exoskeleton, 
allowing us to determine the optimal elastic band stiffness 
alongside its ideal resting length in order to minimize muscle 
activation during gait.  
a. 
OPTIMAL STIFFNESS 
To determine the elastic band’s optimal stiffness, we performed 
static optimization on the provided model using 9 different 
stiffness values spanning 2 orders of magnitude. Stiffness 
values selected were [10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 250, 370, 500, 1000] 
kN/m in order to get a broader scope into how large and small 
stiffness values affected muscle activation. Values beyond 
1000kNm were excluded as they resulted in maximum muscle 
activation for the dorsiflexors.  
Muscle activation of each of the muscle groups studied were 
then plotted for the varying elastic band stiffnesses and an 
integral of overall muscle activation was calculated for each 
muscle group to determine total muscle activation for varying 
elastic band stiffnesses.  
Polynomial regression of grade 2 was then performed on the 
overall activation data to determine the minimum muscle 
activation alongside its elastic band stiffness. 
Finally, static optimization was ran one last time using the 
optimal stiffness value obtained during quadratic regression of 
total muscle activation. This was then plotted alongside the 9 
initial values for validation purposes. 
b. 
OPTIMAL RESTING LENGTH 
Once the optimal stiffness was obtained, we used this value to 
determine the optimal resting length of the elastic band. For this 
analysis we selected resting lengths close to the elastic bands’ 
original size. Values selected were [285, 290, 295, 300] mm. 
Static optimization was performed for each one of these values 
and overall muscle activity was calculated in the same way as 
done for the optimal stiffness determination. A quadratic 
regression model was applied to the overall muscle activation 
and optimal resting length was determined. 
Once again, static optimization was ran using the optimal 
resting length and the results were plotted alongside the original 
4 selected values. 
c. 
GEOMETRY ANALYSIS 
In order for this device to be attachable to the human leg, a non-
intrusive geometric model had to be developed in order to place 
the elastic band parallel to the calf. In this way, the geometric 
path of the elastic band was modified within OpenSim to 
resemble Figure 1. Once a defined geometry was established, 
static optimization was used to determine the optimal elastic 

 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              2 
band stiffness and resting length for this modified geometric 
path. 
 
Figure 1 | Proposed model of the passive exoskeleton using an 
elastic band. The exoskeleton would attach to any arbitrary sneaker 
or shoe through its bootstrap, making it only necessary for the 
subject to attach the device below the knee, resulting in minimal 
discomfort of the foot. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Results were obtained using OpenSim’s built-in Static 
Optimization tool, data for all simulations was exported and 
plotted using the assistance of MATLAB. 
a. 
OPTIMAL STIFFNESS 
There is a clear trend when it comes to elastic band stiffness and 
its force throughout gait cycle. Energy stored in the elastic band 
during loading response and initial single leg stance is 
converted to force and applied during terminal stance to propel 
the body forward. Like this, the stiffer the spring, the more 
energy it can store and therefore the higher force it can exert 
during terminal stance (Figure 1). 
In this way, the force applied during terminal stance by the 
elastic band helps compensate for the force required to lunge 
forward into the initial contact of the opposing leg, therefore 
reducing the activation of the muscles that were originally 
responsible for this task (plantar flexors). 
When observing the activation of the plantar flexors (Figure 3 
– PF), the effect of the elastic band is favorable, decreasing both 
the overall activation and the initial activation time. However, 
after closer inspection it can also be seen that peak activation 
varies slightly, probably due to the resting length of the elastic 
band being reached and therefore requiring the soleus to take 
over. 
Figure 2 | Force exerted by elastic band over gait cycle for 
different spring stiffnesses. Peak force was obtained with a 
stiffness of 1000kNm without over-activation of the dorsiflexors. 
There is a clear trend, as elastic band stiffness increases, the energy 
stored increases and therefore it can generate greater force. 
 
Figure 3 | Muscle activation over gait cycle of plantar flexors 
(PF) and dorsiflexors (DF) assisted by an elastic band 
exoskeleton for different stiffnesses. A clear decrease in plantar 
flexor activity is seen with an increase in elastic band stiffness. The 
opposite can be said about the dorsiflexors, where muscle activation 
increases with elastic band stiffness. 
 
Furthermore, while the increase in the stiffness of the elastic 
band shows a decrease in the overall plantar flexor activation, it 
is not possible to completely replace the force provided by the 
plantar flexors, at least at an elastic band rest length of 295mm.  
Nonetheless, the effect of the elastic band affects not only the 
muscles it replaces but also the muscles it opposes. While the 
effects of the elastic band can be favorable for the plantar 
flexors (Figure 3 – PF), an opposite effect occurs in the 

 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              3 
dorsiflexors (Figure 3 – DF) whose activation increases with the 
increase of the stiffness of the elastic band. Moreover, when 
comparing Figures 2 and 3 – DF, a clear resemblance can be 
spotted which indicates that the dorsiflexors are compensating 
for the over-stiffness of the elastic band and therefore, a higher 
activation is needed to stretch the elastic band.  
Figure 4 | Muscle activation over gait cycle of knee flexors (KF) 
and knee extensors (KE) assisted by an elastic band exoskeleton 
for different stiffnesses. Muscle activity seems consistent for knee 
flexors (aside from extreme values). Knee extensors’ muscle 
activity decreases with increasing elastic band stiffness. 
 
The two other groups observed during the analysis were the 
knee flexors (KF) and knee extensors (KE) (Figure 4). Whilst 
the effect of the elastic band stiffness was minimal on the knee 
flexors group, a clear impact can be seen on the knee extensor, 
where muscle activation dropped considerably during terminal 
stance for the higher stiffness values. 
When observing Figure 5, overall activation for the plantar 
flexors, dorsiflexors, knee flexors and knee extensor are plotted 
individually. The black tick line represents the sum of the 
activation of all muscle groups, resulting in a curve that 
represents total muscle activation during gait. The black tick 
line is the product of performing quadratic regression on the 
data points plotted (black crosses). In this way, after performing 
quadratic regression for the stiffnesses simulated, an optimal 
value of stiffness appears, for which total muscle activation is 
minimal (Figure 5). The value of this stiffness is exactly 
371,212.12Nm, however it has been rounded off to 370kNm for 
simulation purposes. 
 
Figure 5 | Overall muscle activation of plantar flexors, 
dorsiflexors, knee flexors and knee extensors group muscles for 
varying elastic band stiffness. Plantar flexors’ (red) overall 
activation decreases with the increase in elastic band stiffness, the 
same can be said for knee flexors (green) and knee extensors (cyan) 
but to a lower degree. Dorsiflexors’ (blue) overall activation 
increases with elastic band stiffness, due to increased muscle 
demand required to stretch the elastic band. Overall activation 
(black) of all muscle groups shows to have a point of minimum 
activation with a stiffness of about 370kNm. 
 
b. 
OPTIMAL RESTING LENGTH 
Using the optimal stiffness of 370kNm, optimal resting length 
of the elastic band was determined.  
Muscle activation for plantar flexors (PF), dorsiflexors (DF), 
knee flexors (KF) and knee extensors (KE) were plotted during 
gait cycle for varying elastic band rest length (Figure 6). Special 
attention must be brought towards the trade-off in muscle 
activation between the plantar flexors and the dorsiflexors. As 
elastic band rest length increases, plantar flexor activation 
increases and dorsiflexor activation decreases. In this way, for 
short elastic band rest lengths (285mm) we can see minimal 
activation of the plantar flexors, which suggest an even shorter 
elastic band rest length could result in the elimination of plantar 
flexor activation. However, a shorter elastic band rest length 
would mean higher activation from the dorsiflexors (which are 
already at a 0.8 peak at 285mm) which could easily reach 
excessive activation for this muscle group.  

 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              4 
Figure 6 | Muscle activation over gait cycle of plantar flexors 
(PF), dorsiflexors (DF), knee flexors (KF) and knee extensors 
(KE) assisted by an elastic band exoskeleton for different elastic 
band rest lengths. A clear trade-off can be seen between the plantar 
flexors and the dorsiflexors when the elastic band rest length is 
altered. A more significant effect can be seen, this time in both the 
knee flexors and extensors, where muscle activation decreases with 
a decrease in elastic band rest length. 
 
Overall muscle activation was plotted as seen in figure 7. Note 
that the trend for plantar flexors and dorsiflexors are reversed 
when compared to Figure 5. That is, when the independent 
variable increases, plantar flexor activation increases and 
dorsiflexor activation decreases. 
Figure 7 | Overall muscle activation for different elastic band 
resting lengths. Muscle activation proves to show minimum 
activation at an elastic band rest length of about 295mm.  
 
By varying the elastic band rest length, we were able to 
calculate the overall activation for each muscle group, resulting 
in the total muscle activation for different elastic band rest 
lengths. Figure 7 shows the total muscle activation (black tick 
line) where a minimal point at an elastic band rest length of 
296.96mm can be seen.  
c. 
GEOMETRY ANALYSIS 
For the geometry analysis of a realistic external exoskeleton, 
modifications were done on the geometry path of the elastic 
band as seen on Figure 8. 
Figure 8 | Elastic band geometry simulated in OpenSim. The 
elastic band was modeled in a more realistic way, offsetting it from 
the calf in order to resemble the exoskeleton proposed in Figure 1.  
 

 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              5 
The modification of the geometry path altered both the optimal 
stiffness of the elastic band as well as its optimal resting length.  
Figure 9 | Overall muscle activation of plantar flexors, 
dorsiflexors, knee flexors and knee extensors group muscles for 
varying elastic band stiffness. An optimal point that minimizes 
muscle activation can be seen at an elastic band stiffens of 
165,656.57Nm 
 
Figure 10 | Overall muscle activation of plantar flexors, 
dorsiflexors, knee flexors and knee extensors group muscles for 
varying elastic band rest length. An optimal point that minimizes 
muscle activity can be seen at an elastic band rest length of about 
331.6mm. 
 
For this new geometry, optimal elastic band stiffness shifted to 
the left, resulting in an optimal stiffness of about 165kNm 
(Figure 9), while optimal elastic band rest length shifted slightly 
to the right to an optimal value of about 332mm (Figure 10). 
IV. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION 
We have analyzed how the implementation of an ideal and a 
realistic passive exoskeletal model affects muscle activation 
during gait cycle. It is evident that the addition of an elastic band 
(extension spring) helps reduce the activation of muscle groups 
such as the plantar flexors, particularly during terminal stance. 
However, an opposite reaction can be seen on antagonist muscle 
groups such as the dorsiflexors. In this way, the development of 
an elastic band exoskeleton must be assessed with extreme care 
as slight changes in parameters such as elastic band stiffness 
and elastic band rest length show considerable effects in the 
overall muscle activation during gait. 
These effects can be seen beyond the plantar flexor and 
dorsiflexor muscle groups. Proximal muscle groups such as the 
knee flexors and the knee extensors are also vulnerable to 
changes when an ankle joint exoskeleton is introduced. 
Moreover, we have seen the effect of varying elastic band 
stiffness and elastic band rest length on the four muscle groups 
previously mentioned showing that for an increase in elastic 
band stiffness: plantar flexors, knee flexors and knee extensors 
activation decreases and dorsiflexor activation increases, and 
for an increase in elastic band rest length: plantar flexors, knee 
flexors and knee extensors activation increases and dorsiflexor 
activation decreases. In addition, further assessment of the 
proximal muscle groups show that knee extensors are more 
prone to changes in activation when compared to knee flexors. 
In this analysis, a methodology for calibrating an ankle join 
exoskeleton was presented, showing how optimal stiffness and 
elastic band rest length can be determined to minimize overall 
muscle activation during gait. Regarding optimal stiffness, 
there appears to be a threshold beyond which the impact of the 
exoskeleton becomes significant. In the case of the ideal model, 
effects became more noticeable when going beyond the 
250kNm stiffens value. This is probably because a minimum 
stiffness value is required for the elastic band to generate any 
meaningful force that reduces other muscle groups’ activation. 
On the other hand, elastic band rest length has a more 
significant effect on the activation of the different muscle 
groups. It is important to point out that when varying elastic 
band rest length, there exists a value beyond which the 
exoskeleton becomes trivial. This is because the rest length of 
the elastic band is long enough to not suffer any elongation 
during gait. Nonetheless, one must be equally careful when 
shortening the elastic bands’ rest length as a minimal value can 
easily over-activate the dorsiflexors, resulting in an exoskeleton 
that does more harm than good. 
Moreover, this analysis proposed the development of a realistic 
exoskeleton. Like this, an external noninvasive exoskeleton was 
presented, and its optimal elastic band stiffness, and rest length 
were determined. While the external exoskeleton held some 
resemblance to the ideal model, its location decreased the 
optimal stiffness value. This is probably due to its further 

 
REPU 2022 
Project 03 – KTH 
                              6 
distance from the ankle joint, allowing it to generate greater 
torque without the need of increased stiffness. Regarding the 
elastic band rest length, this was longer than the ideal model due 
to its new geometry and location, linking with the body just 
above and below the top and bottom links of the soleus. 
Finally, the long-term effect of an extension spring ankle joint 
exoskeleton is a topic that requires further research. Using an 
exoskeleton for prolonged periods could result in an atrophy or 
deformation of the muscle groups. Since the exoskeleton 
compensates for some of the force required for terminal stance, 
muscles would become under activated, resulting in less 
exercise than usual, and therefore worsening their performance 
in the long term. However, this can be counteracted by 
performing muscle activity for extended periods of time 
(compared to exercise times without the exoskeleton), 
nonetheless, this trade-off is subject of its own analysis. 
V. REFERENCES 
1. Collins S, Wiggin M & Sawicki G. Reducing the energy cost of human 
walking using an unpowered exoskeleton, Nature. 2015; 522 212-5. 
2. Sawicki GS & Khan NS. A simple model to estimate plantar flexor muscle–
tendon mechanics and energetics during walking with elastic ankle 
exoskeletons, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering. 2015; 63(5): 
914-923. 
3. Burnfield M. Gait analysis: normal and pathological function, Journal of 
Sports Science and Medicine. 2010; 9(2):353. 
